hello everybody this is my short talk
about the planet Saturn and its moons
and we start of course with a fabulous
image from the Cassini mission of Saturn
there the planet with its rings around
it showing the belts on the planets and
the structure within the Rings we've got
lots and lots of individual particles
all orbiting around independently and
they form these very very thin flat
rings and there are two gaps in the
Rings and those are down to disturbance
by the moons of the planets which have a
gravitational influence that prevents
particles orbiting at certain distances
from the planet it is both the thought
of image that you'll see from a small
telescope I took this one myself with a
10 inch reflector using just a webcam to
capture the images create a video and
then take the best frames from that
video and combine them to make one image
and you can see that at the time the
plane of the rings of Saturn was fairly
flat almost a John to us they vary
depending on the position of Saturn and
the position of the earth around their
orbits they can become very wide almost
to the point where you could see the
Rings either above and below the poles
of the planets sometimes they go
completely edge-on and disappear but
here you could just about see them you
can just about make out that gap in the
Rings either side there and one or two
of the colored belts on the planet and
that's roughly what it will look like to
somebody with a powerful telescope at
home through the eyepiece as well of
course after and really powerful
telescopes can produce these magnificent
views that we see here I just want to
basic facts for you Saturn orbits 9.5
times further from the Sun than we do
9.5 astronomical units an au an
astronomical unit is the Earth's Sun
distance and takes just under 30 years
to do so 29
the planet body itself is eight and a
half times that of the earth which means
you could drop 750 Earth's inside it but
it's mass is very much less than you
might expect it's only 95 times the mass
of the earth and that makes it less
dense than water on average so they say
if you could find a path large enough
you could make the planet float now
here's a picture taken from the Cassini
spacecraft that plunged into the planet
in in September of 2017 at the end of
its mission as it was diving in it took
some close-up shots then you can see
these amazing worlds and the wavy
patterns along the edges of the
different bands of color on Saturn's
outer atmosphere there of course Saturn
is a gas giant planet and so we can only
really see what's going on in the cloud
tops
is there another who over the pole of
Saturn you can see the blue banding at
the top there is an oblique view of some
of the Rings but here we have the North
Pole of set and it's the polar hexagon a
weird consequence of the equations of
turbulence creates the possibility that
when you have a swirling ring around the
central pole of a planet like this it
can divide up and create a number of sub
storms and sub regions that create a
sort of polygon shape and in particular
a hexagon is quite a nice stable shape
for it here's another view of that in
black and white at the top and a couple
of little animated views at the bottom
there that are just showing that it's
moving and changing all of the time
rather like Jupiter we think that Saturn
has a fairly solid core deep down inside
and perhaps an inner temperature there
of 25,000 degrees and overlaying that
again a high-pressure zone high-pressure
high-temperature
compressing the hydrogen that it's made
of into a liquid metal yeah
atoms are so closely crushed together
that their electrons orbits overlap and
the electrons can then flow freely
around inside the liquid and that makes
it electrically conducting and
overlaying that once you get to the
outer layers where the pressure and
temperature are lower then you've got
ordinary hydrogen gas it's mixed in with
helium it's mixed in with other organic
compounds ammonia methane ethane and so
on and as this diagram shows also got
quite a strong magnetic field as a
consequence of the churning of that
liquid metal hydrogen core so the solar
wind comes in from the Sun that
interacts with that magnetic field and
distorts it creating a bow shock at the
front there and leaving a long tail out
behind Saturn away from the Sun and
there's just mark there the orbit of the
moon Titan which is just about sitting
in the bow shock not a particularly
comfortable place to be but it's just
inside the protective layers of the
beginnings of Saturn's magnetic field
that
field can lead to some spectacular
aurora northern and southern lights that
we have on the earth caused by the solar
wind impact in the atmosphere and the
solar winds strong enough even out here
at certain to interact with its magnetic
field and create these light shows as
shown here in the picture there Cassini
space mission did a special Hoover and
created an eclipse for itself it went
round behind the planet Saturn so the
Sun is completely blocked out and that
really amazing illumination angle has
given us this marvelous picture of the
rings of Saturn and quite a lot of the
moons are labeled there over to the left
we have Enceladus but just in the earth
and its moon and up here we have Mars
now it's old it's here on earth doing
this and they called for every one in
the entire population of the earth to
turn their faces up to the sky and smile
so this is a photograph of the whole
population of the earth in one pixel
there and called the day the earth
smiled fantastic pictures of the backlit
ring structure there again of Saturn and
the dusty outer rings showing there as
well as the more prominent inner ones
you can really see the banded structure
of them and it's as I said controlled by
the moons here on the right we've got
two little moons just small potato
shaped objects 84 and 102 km/h
but they are shepherding a set of rings
between them they've got these ring
particles trapped between the gravity of
Saturn and the interactions of the
gravity of these two little moons that
orbit around and they're creating that
banded wavy structure on the innermost
ring there and keeping all those ring
particles trapped and you can also see
on the left hand picture it looks like
there is a small moon beginning to form
right
on the outer edge of one of the Rings
there where as a little blob of material
beginning to gather itself together so
maybe that's the birth of a new small
ring moon but aside from the little tiny
moons Saturn has a fantastic array of
interesting moons that are well worth
taking a look at in their own right
we've got an array of them Illustrated
around here they're the right scale for
themselves
Saturn obviously is made to be more
distant in this picture and therefore
smaller and further away but it shows
the relative sizes with Titan being the
largest of the family of moons not the
same size as the planet mercury is five
thousand one hundred and fifty
kilometers in diameter if it orbited the
Sun we'd call it a planet you can see it
was discovered shortly after the
invention of the telescope at sixteen
fifty five here and Christian Huygens
was the first man to notice it all we
see from Earth and with our telescopes
is this orange smog that fills Titan's
atmosphere the atmosphere is actually
1/2 times as thick as our own mostly
made of nitrogen but it contains methane
and lots of other organic compounds
again some of these Solon's these
complicated organic compounds made by
interaction between ultraviolet light
and there's more simple chemicals there
for a long time we weren't sure about
the temperature we thought that this
atmosphere might result in a greenhouse
effect and trap
quite a lot of heat inside Titan down to
the surface but we now know that the
temperature on the surface is minus 160
degrees C so any water that's down there
is frozen solid hard as iron and their
form of ice and takes the place of a lot
of the mountain building regions a lot
of mountains are built up of ice on
Titan now of course we do that because
we are shooting down a little probe
called Huygens down through the
atmosphere the top left-hand picture
shows the atmosphere with an infra
camera from the Cassini spacecraft and
it's just beginning to see through that
haze the top left picture though shows
the mountains and the valleys between
them with what looked like river
channels carved out in them as the
Huygens probe was parachuting down and
then the bottom right picture is the
pebble covered orange smog illuminated
beach that it landed on it either a
dried-up river bank or a the bitter
Beach of a lake there that it's landed
in and the picture on the left lower is
the Kraken moir an actual lake on Titan
but it's not a lake of water it's made
of liquid methane that minus 180 degrees
C methane that we have as natural gas
and we cook with and heat our homes is
in the form of a liquid and can form
these lakes and you can even see river
channels leading down into the lake
there from various directions and so we
definitely know that there's weather
with these clouds of methane raining and
snowing out methane ice and methane
liquid which is carving out the river
channels and flowing into these lakes
we've even seen seasonal changes with
the lakes filling and receiving a couple
of images of the river channels and even
it's another small lake there at the top
right hand side we have clouds on Titan
and we can see that they've moved and
even see that the ringed area there some
marshy boggy areas have dried out
between the right hand picture and the
left hand picture and the Lake Ontario
lacus
has definitely almost completely dried
out between the two and again here's
crack and moire and we've got a little
bit of the land there cut out in the
insert area onto the left-hand side and
you can see as we've taken pictures of
it at different flybys at different
years from 2007 to 2015 the land shape
has changed but
is because the level of liquid in the
ocean in the lake there is going up and
down more views of clouds on Titan high
in its atmosphere and looking down
through them with infrared seeing some
of those smaller lakes there
so that's Titan is rear and since the
ninth largest in the whole solar system
1500 kilometers in diameter and it
probably has its own ring system so not
only to certain have rings but Rhea moon
of Saturn has rings as well and a thin
atmosphere of oxygen carbon dioxide and
again a low temperature minus 174 the
rings were discovered by looking at the
passage of a star going behind the
direction that we were looking RIA and
seeing the drop in the light you can see
the light curve plotted there and some
dips in the light curve outside of where
the diameter of the main planet was and
that's indicating that those rings were
blocking some of the light from behind
it also got to that very different
surfaces it points one side at Saturn
all the time and therefore spins on its
axis at the same rate that it rotates
around the main planet and that means it
has a leading edge and a trailing edge
as it goes along its orbit and the
trailing edge is covered in those dirty
organic Fowley ins again these organic
materials that are a signpost to
possible hints of that may be some sort
of biochemistry going on amazing ice
cliffs and these are again hinting
towards the possibility of internal
water oceans on this moon underneath the
protective layer of the ice there and
kept warm by radioactive elements
trapped in the core and the possible
tidal interactions between this moon and
others next-largest a little bit smaller
as de oni come ranks 15th in the solar
system and just over
100 kilometers in diameter again another
Oceanworld underneath the ice here we
have a trapped liquid water ocean
perhaps a hundred kilometers deep that's
warm enough not to freeze and we can see
on its trailing edge again more of those
dirty Browns organic tholins that appear
to have emerged up through some cracks
in the crust
so maybe the crust is quite thin there
perhaps there was an impact we don't
know we need to study this in more
detail the thoroughly show though for
the Cassini mission was the moon
Enceladus and this magnificent image
which shows an ice moon with a few
craters up there at the top and what
looks like an ice sheet with the blue
cracks in it they called these the tiger
stripes for some reason Tigers aren't
blue but never mind and looked back
those tiger stripe cracks are emitting
water venting out into space there's a
good back of Enceladus venting water
into space they flew the spacecraft
through these plumes and were able to
detect organic material hydrogen gas all
sorts of interesting chemistry which all
point again to possible biological
activity down inside that liquid ocean
in the protected biosphere underneath
the ice and here's a kind of cutaway
view of Enceladus we think that southern
ocean there where it's venting waters of
space is perhaps doesn't cover the whole
of the little moon but it might just be
a very large ocean on one side continue
to amaze me when we look at this one
this is Iapetus let's go again our light
face covered in white frosty material
that's picked up from particles escaping
from certains rings and then a big ridge
that runs around the center there that
looks like we're two halves of a coconut
I've been joined together here's a
close-up image of that equatorial Ridge
there are about four or five different
theories about why this Ridge might be
there might be a collapsed ring it might
be a result of shrinkage of the moon
there are all sorts of ideas but we
really don't know and on some of the icy
patches they have this amazing black
material deposited on the surface
carbon-rich we know that but what it
quite is we're still needing to
investigate more so I think another
mission to Saturn is definitely called
for there are these pair of moons here
well they were originally called Janus
and discovered in 1966 but it turns out
that there are in fact two moons Janus
and Epimetheus we call them and they're
co-orbiting they share the same orbit
and what happens is that one catches up
with the other one because it's in a
very slightly lower orbit and then they
do a gravitational tug ofwar and a quick
swap and they swap orbits with each
other and the lower one it goes into the
higher orbit the higher went into the
lower orbit and then gets they separate
again because the one in the lower orbit
is in front and it moves faster there so
it goes round till it catches up again
and then they have another interaction
of Asians so you can see in this diagram
there they're doing these weird
horseshoe maneuvers relative to each
other and keep swapping positions quite
a strange but this did confuse people
for a long time another rather nice
little moon of Saturn is my muskrat or
moon with a whopping great crater on it
if this crater from an impact had been
much larger it might actually have
destroyed - but well a piece of fun they
say maybe actually it looks like this
Hyperion which is covered in these
amazing vents that look like it's made
out of bath salts or something
and this could be because it's a
captured comet and it previously has
been venting material to create a
cometary
Hale before coming too close to Saturn
and being captured this is I see Phoebe
with these amazing ice cliffs on it so
again there are lots more to look at in
terms of the science of understanding
all of these amazing moons around Saturn
it's not just all about settling and its
rings thank you very much I will bring
this session to a close now and the next
one in this series will be the ice
giants Uranus and Neptune